Let’s open our Bibles, please,
to Matthew chapter 26,
and we will begin at verse 36.
Matthew 26:36:
“Then Jesus came with them [his disciples]
“to the spot called Gethsemane,
“and he said to [his] disciples:
“‘Sit down here while I go over there
[to] pray.’”
“While I go over there [to] pray.”
The eternal future of all mankind
rested on Jesus’ shoulders.
His remaining faithful to God was essential.
He knew that if he did not remain faithful,
it would be a slap in the face of Jehovah.
It was prayer at this time in his life
that was the most important thing.
‘Yes, I am perfect;
‘I have supernatural powers;
‘I can resurrect the dead;
I can perform miracles;
‘I’m the second greatest personage
in the universe;
‘I shared in the creation.
‘But no, I’m not depending on that
at this time.
‘I’m not depending on supernatural powers
and natural abilities.
‘I’m depending on my Father;
I’m leaning on him.
‘It is prayer;
it is supplication.
‘That’s what I am depending on
at this time.
‘I need my Father’s help.
‘If I’m going to surrender
my life today in a way
‘that brings honor to him
and remain as an integrity keeper,
‘I need to pray.
So I’m going over there to pray.’
The first valuable lesson
we learn right here is
that we ‘work out our salvation’ today
“with fear and trembling.”
We’re careful that overconfidence
does not overtake us
or just thinking that years of service
or somehow past acts of loyalty
would be a license into the new world.
No!
Now is the time to pray.
Now is the time.
As we come into the great tribulation
—it’s in the offing—
now is the time
to take stock of ourselves.
And if we find ourselves
running any yellow lights
and we haven’t gotten
in an accident yet,
now is the time
to put on the brakes.
Now is the time
to “go over there and pray.”
Let’s read verse 37:
“And taking along Peter
and the two sons of Zebedee,
he began to feel grieved
and . . . greatly troubled.”
Verse 38, and He said:
“I am deeply grieved, even to death.”
This was no act.
This was no show.
Jesus’ feelings were real.
He was deeply grieved,
greatly troubled.
Why?
Because he knew his death
as a criminal on a stake
would be a reproach
to his Father, Jehovah God.
That’s what he was concerned about
—blaspheming his Father,
being accused of cursing God.
It was just too much for him to bear.
This is what grieves him greatly,
not himself and his reputation
but his Father’s name and reputation.
So again, think about the lesson
that we learn.
What is the most important thing in our life?
What are we deeply grieved about?
Being misunderstood
or not getting
a particular privilege, and so forth?
No, that’s not what grieves us.
What grieves us is Jehovah’s name,
bringing reproach on that name.
We want to do everything
we can to honor that name.
Here we are
as the United States Bethel family.
And we owe it to Jehovah,
because of our privileges
and what he has allowed us to do,
to be here and to serve him
—honoring his name
and bringing no reproach,
whether in public or in private.
That’s our goal.
We should feel deeply grieved
and sorely troubled
in just the thought
of bringing reproach upon Jehovah.
And Jehovah is just as real to us
as the person sitting next to us.
Now let’s read verse 39:
“And going a little way forward,
“he fell facedown,
praying.”
He falls “facedown, praying.”
Think of the intensity that he was under.
“Facedown, praying.”
Luke reports that at this point,
He got “into an agony”
and “he continued praying
more earnestly;
and his sweat
became as drops of blood.”
“Facedown, praying.”
Facedown and his sweat
becoming drops of blood.
He was keenly aware of the pain
of what his Father would go through
as He would watch His beloved Son
put on a stake and treated
in such a barbaric fashion.
He knew that.
No wonder,
no wonder that during his ministry
when he’s explaining to his disciples
that he would have to die,
no wonder he reacted so strongly
to Peter’s words
when Peter said:
‘Be kind to yourself, Lord;
this isn’t going to happen to you.’
‘Be kind to yourself;
‘What?
“Be kind” to myself.
‘Here I am in this garden;
‘my sweat has become
as drops of blood;
and you’re telling me
“be kind” to myself.’
No wonder He said:
“Get behind me, Satan!”
What a strong rebuke.
Because in Jesus’ mind,
no, this is not a time
to “be kind” to himself.
Those were words
that could have caused a stumbling block.
Now, let’s go further in verse 39:
“My Father, if it is possible,
let this cup pass away from me.”
Let the cup, the cup of reproach,
the cup of dishonoring your name
—I can’t handle that—
let it pass away;
but Jehovah didn’t.
Jehovah said: “No.
This is the way I want it to be.”
So Christ lined up his will
along with Jehovah’s will.
And he knew Jehovah was hearing him;
he knew this supplication
was ascending to the heavens.
He knew because
from his prehuman existence
he watched his Father answer prayers.
He watched it.
He saw evidence
when he was the Firstborn
there in the heavens with his Father.
He watched his Father answer
these supplications and pleadings
of whether it be
Hannah or Ruth or David.
He saw that.
So he knew, ‘My Father is listening
and will answer this prayer,’
and He did,
because, again,
the Gospel accounts that parallel this say
that an angel was sent
to encourage Jesus at this time.
What an encouragement
that angel must have been!
Obviously, Jesus would have known him
from His prehuman existence.
He gave reassuring words,
“You have your Father’s favor”;
he gave Him fresh strength
to continue that night.
And it is of interest that apparently
that angel was able to tell Jesus
that your death will not be of reproach
on your Father’s name.
In fact, your death is going
to be the very thing
that Jehovah God uses to sanctify his name.
So the very thing that was weighing
on Jesus so much,
Jehovah said:
“No, it won’t reproach me.
I am going to use it to sanctify my name.”
So just think about
how encouraged Jesus was by that.
And the lesson for you and for me,
again another vital lesson:
How do you know
how Jehovah uses our acts of loyalty
when we line up our will with his?
Even when it’s not easy,
we do what Jehovah asks us to do.
These acts of loyalty are piling up,
and it’s evidence that he can use
against the Devil to say:
“Look!
Look!
“That is sanctifying my name.
That Bethelite is sanctifying me,
that Bethelite and that Bethelite.”
You see, that’s an honor
that we never want to forget.
Finally, verse 46:
“Get up, let us go. . . .
My betrayer has drawn near.”
“Get up.”
What did he mean by those words?
Think of the power behind them:
“Get up, let us go.”
The time for prayer is over;
now it’s time for action.
It’s as if Jesus was saying:
“It’s time to rise from my knees
“and get up and go into the battle.
“Let me get up
and be betrayed by Judas;
“let me get up
and be subjected to an illegal trial;
and be put on that torture stake,
“slapped, beaten, and even nailed
in an excruciating manner.
“It’s time to do it.
Let’s do it.
Get up.
Let’s go.”
We kneel before God
so that we may stand erect
to face our challenges.
So, what a powerful lesson
that is, again, for you and me.
We pray, we pray,
and then it’s time to get up.
We get up;
go to work.
Get up;
go hit the publications.
go in the field service.
In other words, we pray
and we get up and we follow through.
Christ Jesus proved faithful
because of supplication in prayer
that he uttered to his Father,
and may Jehovah give us
the strength to do the same.